The Essay Section

I took the Essay section last. At this point everyone in the house was sleeping and I could really concentrate. This section took me almost exactly one hour.

The test says that your essay should be between 200 and 800 words. It will not pass if it is less than 200 or greater than 800. A word counter is supplied for you. It also said it should be gramatically correct and have balanced paragraphs. You will not pass if the paragraphs are not balanced.

The test suggested writing it first in a word processor and copying over to the exam page. I did this. I used Microsoft Word and when I was finished I ran the spelling/grammer checker. It found words that were mis-typed and spelled incorrectly, it also found a couple passive voice sections, a place where I should have used a noun instead of a pronoun and two punctuation errors. I highly suggest running your essay through a word processor before submitting!

My question was a simple one. A basic, What do you think.... Why? Use as many details as you need to support your argument.

When writing an essay I always use an outline. Sometimes it's in my head, but for this high-stakes test, I wrote it out. My essay writing method is get their attention and tell them what you are going to tell them in an essay. Make your points. Then reiterate what you told them.

This gives you a good idea on how I used my outline for this essay:

I. Introduction (paragraph one)- attention grabber and highlight the information that will be provided.

II. Body

A. Main point one is first sentence (paragraph 2) - Use three or four more sentences to back up with specific examples/facts.

B. Main point two is first sentence (paragraph 3) - Use three or four more sentences to back up with specific examples/facts.

C. Main point three is first sentence (paragraph 4) - Use three or four more sentences to back up with specific examples/facts.

III. Conclusion (Paragraph 6) - Reiterate what you have just expressed in the body, then bring it back to the attention grabber in the introduction.

Thanks to writing at Hub Pages I have gotten familiar with what word counts look like, so I knew I had to be concise. Otherwise I probably would have gone way over with my word count. Each of my paragraphs were 4-5 sentences long.

In the end my essay was 762 words. Because of this short length, I didn't feel that I had given them my best writing, but what I did write was coherent, to the point and easy to follow which I think is what they look for more than content. There is a LOT of paper writing in college and I think they just want to know if you can write coherently.

I found the Essay Section of the WGU Readiness assessment to be the most difficult section because it was time consuming and frustrating due to the limitations imposed.

